[HUDI-8780][RFC-83] Incremental Table Service (#12514)
apache/hudi: rfc/rfc-83/rfc-83.md

Use `IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy` to control the behavior of getting partitions, filter partitions, also incremental getting partitions if necessary etc.

```java
package org.apache.hudi.table;

import org.apache.hudi.common.engine.HoodieEngineContext;
import org.apache.hudi.common.table.HoodieTableMetaClient;
import org.apache.hudi.common.table.timeline.HoodieInstant;
import org.apache.hudi.common.util.Option;
import org.apache.hudi.config.HoodieWriteConfig;

import java.util.List;

public interface IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy {

  /**
   * Get partition paths to be performed for current table service.
   * @param metaClient
   * @return
   */
  List<String> getPartitionPaths(HoodieWriteConfig writeConfig, HoodieTableMetaClient metaClient, HoodieEngineContext engineContext);

  /**
   * Filter partition path for given fully paths.
   * @param metaClient
   * @return
   */
  List<String> filterPartitionPaths(HoodieWriteConfig writeConfig, List<String> partitionPaths);

  /**
   * Get incremental partitions from EarliestCommitToRetain to instantToRetain
   * @param instantToRetain
   * @param type
   * @param deleteEmptyCommit
   * @return
   * @throws IOException
   */

>   List<String> getIncrementalPartitionPaths(HoodieWriteConfig writeConfig, HoodieTableMetaClient metaClient);

Reviewer: Should we just add one interface `List<String> filterPartitionPaths(HoodieWriteConfig writeConfig, List<String> allPartitionPaths, List<String> incrementalPartitionPaths);` to that the strategy can decide which partition are choosed.

The `getXXXPartitionPaths` should belong to the scope of the executor/planner, let's move them out.

to process incremental partitions related data. Also this feature is enabled by default.

## Background
Hudi has powerful out-of-the-box table service capabilities, such as Compaction and Clustering, to reorganize lake table 
data, balance read and write performance, and keep the overall lake table in a healthy state. Generally speaking, We always 
integrate table services with normal write jobs, executing table services asynchronously or synchronously.

In the Compaction/Clustering Plan stage, Hudi will get partitions, filtering them based on strategy and building 
related table service plan.

For now, Clustering and Compaction will obtain all table partitions at the beginning. This is an expensive and time-consuming 
operation. As the table partitions continue to increase, The pressure on table service is increasing, which may affect the 
performance and stability of the entire writing job.

## Design
In the design of Incremental Table service, the following principles are followed:
1. It is unaware of users, that is, it is fully adapted to the partition filtering, Target IO restrictions and other capabilities provided in the existing strategy.

> 2. All strategies are enabled this incremental processing by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. All strategies are working under the incremental processing by default
```

> 3. Table services to be added later can quickly realize incremental partitioning capabilities

Reviewer: To keep good extensibility for new table services.

### Abstraction

### Strategy Interface

> Add a new marked strategy interface `IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy`. Any Strategy implement this `IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new marking strategy interface `IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy`. Any Strategy implement this `IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy` 
```

passed to the current strategy.

```java
package org.apache.hudi.table;

import org.apache.hudi.config.HoodieWriteConfig;

import java.util.List;

public interface IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy {
  /**
   * Filter the given incremental partitions.
   * @param writeConfig
   * @param incrementalPartitions 
   * @return Pair of final processing partition paths and filtered partitions which will be recorded as missing partitions.
   * Different strategies can individually implement whether to record, or which partitions to record as missing partitions.
   */
  Pair<List<String>,List<String>> filterPartitionPaths(HoodieWriteConfig writeConfig, List<String> incrementalPartitions);
}

```

### Abstract TableServicePlanActionExecutor
For table services like clustering and compaction, at plan stage, they will performance the same partition operations, 
that is, first obtain the partition, and then filter the partition. The difference is that clustering obtains partitions in strategy.

Considering that partition acquisition should be a general behavior of the engine, while partition filtering should be a

> specific behavior of different strategies, here we perform a small-scale reconstruction of the clustering and compaction plan to achieve:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specific behavior of different strategies, here we perform a small refactoring to the clustering and compaction plan to achieve:
```

> 1. Unify partition acquisition in PlanActionExecutor

Reviewer: unified

2. Traverse the completion time of the active commit instants, and select all the instants whose completion time is within the time window as incremental instants, that is, T2 and T5.
3. Get all incremental partitions involved in incremental instants as *PARTITIONS 1*
4. Get the missing partitions recorded in T3.compaction.requested as *PARTITIONS 2*
5. Merge and deduplicate *PARTITIONS 1* with *PARTITIONS 2* as final incremental partitions as *INCREMENTAL PARTITIONS 1*
6. Based on *INCREMENTAL PARTITIONS 1*, perform strategy custom partition filtering logic to obtain the final partition List *INCREMENTAL PARTITIONS 2* and the filtered *MISSING PARTITIONS*
7. Perform normal Table Service scheduling based on *INCREMENTAL PARTITIONS 2*. If partition scheduling is incomplete due to Target IO and other factors, add the corresponding partition to *MISSING PARTITIONS*
8. Finally generate the Table Service Plan and record *MISSING PARTITIONS* in it

Note: If the instant time of the last completed TableService cannot be obtained due to reasons such as archive, the partition 

> acquisition operation will be rollback to obtain all table partitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
acquisition operation will fall back to obtaining all table partitions.
```

Author: all changed. PTAL~

     xxxx
 ]
}
```
How to get incremental partitions during cleaning

![cleanIncrementalpartitions.png](cleanIncrementalpartitions.png)

**Note**
`EarliestCommitToRetain` is recorded in `HoodieCleanMetadata`
newInstantToRetain is computed based on Clean configs such as `hoodie.clean.commits.retained` and will be record in clean meta as new EarliestCommitToRetain

## Design And Implementation

### Changes in TableService Metadata Schema

Add new column `earliestInstantToRetain` (default null) in Clustering/Compaction plan same as `earliestInstantToRetain` in clean plan

```text
    {
      "name": "earliestInstantToRetain",
      "type":["null", {
        "type": "record",
        "name": "HoodieActionInstant",
        "fields": [
          {
            "name": "timestamp",
            "type": "string"
          },
          {
            "name": "action",
            "type": "string"
          },
          {
            "name": "state",
            "type": "string"
          }
        ]
      }],
      "default" : null
    },
```

We also need a unified interface/abstract-class to control the Plan behavior of the TableService including clustering and compaction.

### Abstraction

> Use `PartitionBaseTableServicePlanStrategy` to control the behavior of getting partitions, filter partitions and generate table service plan etc.

Reviewer: Maybe we name it `IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy` to emphasize it is "incremental".

Author: changed

  /**
   * Generate table service plan based on given instant.
   * @return
   */
  public abstract R generateTableServicePlan(List<S> operations) throws IOException;

  /**
   * Get partition paths to be performed for current table service.
   * @param metaClient
   * @return
   */
  public abstract List<String> getPartitionPaths(HoodieWriteConfig writeConfig, HoodieTableMetaClient metaClient, HoodieEngineContext engineContext);

  /**
   * Filter partition path for given fully paths.
   * @param metaClient
   * @return
   */
  public abstract List<String> filterPartitionPaths(HoodieWriteConfig writeConfig, List<String> partitionPaths);

  /**
   * Get incremental partitions from EarliestCommitToRetain to instantToRetain
   * @param instantToRetain
   * @param type
   * @param deleteEmptyCommit
   * @return
   * @throws IOException
   */
  public List<String> getIncrementalPartitionPaths(Option<HoodieInstant> instantToRetain) {
    throw new UnsupportedOperationException("Not support yet");
  }

  /**
   * Returns the earliest commit to retain from instant meta
   */
  public Option<HoodieInstant> getEarliestCommitToRetain() {

>     throw new UnsupportedOperationException("Not support yet");

Reviewer: The `IncrementalPartitionAwareStrategy` should be an user interface IMO, the only API we expose to user is the incremental partitions since last table service. So the logic of following should be removed:

1. generate plan (should be responsibility of the planner)
2. getEarliestCommitToRetain (should be responsibility of the planner within the plan executor)

And because the implementaion of compaction and clustering are quite different, maybe we just add two new interfaces: `IncrementalPartitionAwareCompactionStrategy` and `IncrementalPartitionAwareClusteringStrategy`

Author: 1.  generate plan and getEarliestCommitToRetain is removed.
2. As for base abstraction, although the implementation of compaction and clustering are quite different, but for Partition Aware's Compaction and clustering, they both have the same partition processing logic, that is, first obtain the partition and then filter the partition, so maybe we can use one interface for both to control partition related operations. What do u think :)

Author: In addition, Danny, what's your opinion for the logic of incremental partition acquisition? 
Option1 : Record a metadata field in the commit to indicate where the last processing was done
Option2: Directly obtain the last completed table service commit time as the new starting point

Option2 is simpler and does not require modifying and processing commit metadata fields.

When there are many historical partitions, such as 640,000 in our production environment, this scanning and planning operation becomes very inefficient. 
For Flink, it often leads to checkpoint timeouts, resulting in data delays.
As for cleaning, we already have the ability to do cleaning for incremental partitions.

This RFC will draw on the design of Incremental Clean to generalize the capability of processing incremental partitions to all table services, such as Clustering and Compaction.

## Background

`earliestInstantToRetain` in clean plan meta

HoodieCleanerPlan.avsc

```text
{
  "namespace": "org.apache.hudi.avro.model",
  "type": "record",
  "name": "HoodieCleanerPlan",
  "fields": [
    {
      "name": "earliestInstantToRetain",
      "type":["null", {
        "type": "record",
        "name": "HoodieActionInstant",
        "fields": [
          {
            "name": "timestamp",
            "type": "string"
          },
          {
            "name": "action",
            "type": "string"
          },
          {
            "name": "state",
            "type": "string"
          }
        ]
      }],
      "default" : null
    },
    xxxx
  ]
}
```

> `EarliestCommitToReta` in clean commit meta

Reviewer: retain

Author: Changed.

**Note**
`EarliestCommitToRetain` is recorded in `HoodieCleanMetadata`
newInstantToRetain is computed based on Clean configs such as `hoodie.clean.commits.retained` and will be record in clean meta as new EarliestCommitToRetain

## Design And Implementation

### Current Table Service Plan AND Execute Logic

![currentTableServiceDiagram.png](currentTableServiceDiagram.png)

### Changes in TableService Metadata Schema

Add new column `earliestInstantToRetain` in Clustering/Compaction plan same as `earliestInstantToRetain` in clean plan

```text
    {
      "name": "earliestInstantToRetain",
      "type":["null", {
        "type": "record",
        "name": "HoodieActionInstant",
        "fields": [
          {
            "name": "timestamp",
            "type": "string"
          },
          {
            "name": "action",
            "type": "string"
          },
          {
            "name": "state",
            "type": "string"
          }
        ]
      }],
      "default" : null
    },
```

Add `EarliestCommitToReta` in HoodieCommitMetadata extra meta MAP for clustering and compaction operation which are all written-commit

```text

> {"name": "earliestCommitToRetain", "type": "string"}

Reviewer: earliestInstantToRetain or earliestCommitToRetain ?

Author: maybe we can record this earliestInstantToRetain in clustering/compaction plan request meta file. So no need this change any more.

```

> We also need a unified interface/abstract-class to control the Plan behavior and Commit behavior of the TableService.

Reviewer: Can you elaborate why this is needed?

Author: > Use `BaseTableServicePlanStrategy` to control the behavior of getting partitions, filter partitions and generate table service plan etc.

Since we want to implement different strategies to control partition retrieval, partition filtering, and plan generation,
So the first step is to use an abstraction to unify these logics for different strategy i think.

import org.apache.hudi.exception.HoodieNotSupportedException;
import org.apache.hudi.table.HoodieTable;

import java.io.IOException;
import java.util.List;

public abstract class TableServiceBaseActionExecutor<T, I, K, O, R> extends BaseActionExecutor<T, I, K, O, R> implements TableServiceCommitter<R> {

  public TableServiceBaseActionExecutor(HoodieEngineContext context, HoodieWriteConfig config, HoodieTable<T, I, K, O> table, String instantTime) {
    super(context, config, table, instantTime);
  }

  /**
   * Returns the earliest commit to retain and will record in meta as new EarliestCommitToRetain
   */
  public Option<HoodieInstant> getEarliestCommitToRetain() {
    return null;
  }

  /**
   * get partitions to be performed in current table service
   * @param instantToRetain
   * @param type
   * @return
   * @throws IOException
   */
  public List<String> getPartitionPaths(Option<HoodieInstant> instantToRetain, TableServiceType type) {
    return null;
  }

  /**
   * Get incremental partitions from EarliestCommitToRetain to instantToRetain
   * @param instantToRetain
   * @param type
   * @param deleteEmptyCommit
   * @return
   * @throws IOException
   */

>   private List<String> getIncrementalPartitionPaths(Option<HoodieInstant> instantToRetain, TableServiceType type) {

Reviewer: shouldn't each table service executor already distinguish the service type? Maybe `type` can be eliminated.

Author: removed.

    return null;
  }

  /**
   * Get all table partitions related to current table
   * @param instantToRetain
   * @param type
   * @param deleteEmptyCommit
   * @return
   * @throws IOException
   */
  private List<String> getAllPartitionPaths(Option<HoodieInstant> instantToRetain, TableServiceType type) {
    return null;
  }

>   public R buildCommitMeta() {

Reviewer: Not sure we need this.

Author: no need actually. removed.

    return null;
  }

}

```

### Optimize the inheritance relationship of Table Service

![NewTableServiceDiagram.png](NewTableServiceDiagram.png)

### Work Flow for Incremental Table Service

> Table Service Planner

Reviewer 2: Currently we are using `completion time`, should we indicate here whether `instant` refers to `request time` or `completion time`?

Author: Request time I believe. If using completion, it may miss some instant when multi-write.

> 1. Retrieve the instant recorded in the last completed table service commit as **INSTANT 1**.

Reviewer: Do we want to take care of the cases where `INSTANT 1` already been archived?

Author: We record `EarliestCommitToRetain` in the TableService Request metadata file and use it as the basis for retrieving incremental partitions. 
Therefore, when Incremental Table Service is enabled, we should always ensure that there is a Clustering/Compaction request metadata in the active timeline.

Also we can use getAllpartitions as Cover-up plan

Reviewer: > Therefore, when Incremental Table Service is enabled, we should always ensure that there is a Clustering/Compaction request metadata in the active timeline.

Not really, for cleaning this is true because there could be data quality issues of wrong files are cleaned, but Compaction and Clustering are just rewrites.

2. Calculate the current instant to be processed as **INSTANT 2**.

> 3. Obtain all partitions involved from **INSTANT 1** to **INSTANT 2** as incremental partitions and perform the table service plan operation.

Reviewer 3: If we turn on the incremental table service mode, are the various flexible partition selection mechanisms now unavailable? Consider the following scenario: 
- on ts_0, write to two partitions: p_1 and p_2
- on ts_1, a schedule compaction compaction with parittion-selection-strategy that only compacts p_2
- on ts_2, write to p_2 again.
- on ts_3  compaction will only process partitions written between ts_1 and ts_3. Compaction will still only merge p_2. When can a compaction occur that compacts p_1?

Author: Also in `IncrementalxxxxStrategy` maybe we can record `missing partitions` in plan and Process the missing partitions together with the new fetched incremental partitions next time

# RFC-83: Incremental Table Service

## Proposers
- @zhangyue19921010

## Approvers
- @danny0405
- @yuzhaojing

## Status
JIRA: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HUDI-8780

## Abstract

> Currently, Table Service, including Clustering and Compaction, need to scans all partitions of the table during the strategy 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Table Service, including Clustering and Compaction, need to scan all partitions of the table during the strategy 
```
